# Washington State COVID-19 Infection Rate Impact on Unemployment

This repo will contain the code and data for a course project
for the _Technical Foundations of Informatics_ course at the UW iSchool.

## _Our Problem Domain_
Our project is about unemployment rates in King, Snohomish, Pierce, Clark, and Spokane counties in Washington compared to their respective coronavirus infection rates by month in 2020.The coronavirus is the most dangerous virus in 2020 and it affects not only people's lives but also the economy. People who work in entertainment industry (restaurants, cinemas, etc.) may lose their jobs because of the quarantine that prevents people from going outdoors. Higher infection rates may cause stricter quarantine policies and will cause higher unemployment rates as a result. We will analyze if there is actually a connection between the unemployment rates and the infection rates in the community.

We analyze unemployment rates with respective to infection rates because unemployment does not only affect those who have jobs, it also affects those people who are searching for jobs and the community's economy. The unemployment can cause a chain reaction that makes more people lose jobs and shortens up the service provided in the community, which as a result affect people's lives in a negative way. If we can find out a positive linear connection between unemployment rates and infection rates, we may be able to control unemployment rate by reducing infection rates through better practical policies.

There are two existing analysis involves unemployment and coronavirus. The first one is the impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on [The Employment Situation for December 2020](https://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/empsit_01082021.htm).The second one is a research that concludes that unemployment rose higher in three months of COVID-19 than it did in two years of the [Great Recession by Rakesh Kochhar](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/06/11/unemployment-rose-higher-in-three-months-of-covid-19-than-it-did-in-two-years-of-the-great-recession/)

## _Analysis Questions_
## These are some questions that we hope to explore and analyze in our project:
### Do COVID-19 infection rates impact the rate of unemployment in King, Snohomish, Pierce, Clark and Spokane counties?

This is the question we will be trying to answer. This is a very important question about COVID-19 because we know that the policies of self-quarantine and closure of many businesses have been detrimental to the number of open jobs available to the general public, but knowing how the coronavirus itself impacts the current workforce is important to know, and once quantified we can push for a faster recovery by citing specific numbers of how much money the US is losing a year, or how many families do not have jobs to the severity of the virus rather than the policy itself. I think it is important to differentiate unemployment because of policy and unemployment because of the virus, because although they are interdependent, quantifying exactly how much damage the virus is doing will allow us to form policies with more specific data. We can determine this using the data sets of Unemployment Data, and COVID Cases in Washington.

### Does a lower rate of unemployment lead to higher COVID cases in King, Snohomish, Pierce, Clark and Spokane counties?
This question will allow us to see whether or not employment is correlated with the spread of COVID. This question is based on many assumptions, such as everyone working is in contact with others and the number of people aren't a factor in spreading the coronavirus. Despite these short comings, the result of this analysis will open many meaningful questions that could benefit many essential workers working in places where they come in contact with many people. For example if this question is answered with yes, we can associate that if a lot of people are working COVID spreads faster, and from this we can segment the industries, and make others hypotheses on these specific industries to hopefully find a way to decrease the risk in working in those industries. We can determine whether or not they are correlated with the two data sets we have.

### How have the unemployment rates been impacted since COVID-19 started.
This is an important question to answer so we can quantify how many people have lost their jobs due to the virus, and still don't have a job. We can use this number to formulate policies using exact numbers as a basis rather than a guess. We can determine this using the Washington State Unemployment Data.

### Have infection cases been increasing in low-population counties compared to high-population counties, and if so by how much?
By getting specific numbers of how much infection cases have been rising compared to infection cases in higher-density counties we can compare whether or not population is a role in spreading the coronavirus. If the answer to this is no, then this leads us to make more hypotheses on why low-population counties spread just as much COVID as high population counties. If the answer to this is yes, then we can use the correlation between the number of people in a county and COVID infection cases, to make new hypotheses about why this happening. The answers to either of these hypotheses will give is tremendous insight on how to stop COVID from becoming worse, but for the mean time this question is meaningful to make way for other work that might come after. We can find a correlation between county population and COVID infection rates, using the two data sets we have.

## _Data Sets_
### Washington State Unemployment Data
This data shows the monthly unemployment counts for each of Washington's 5 most populous counties (Clark, King, Pierce, Snohomish, Spokane). The data set ranges from January 2020 through December 2020. The data was found at the [Unemployment Security Department of Washington State](https://esd.wa.gov/labormarketinfo/unemployment-insurance-data). The data was collected by the USDW, which is part of the WA government. I did data entry to a new csv file by using the data infographics displayed on the website. This data set will help answer the analysis questions concerned with what the trend of unemployment claims was throughout 2020, including the few months before the COVID-19 pandemic.
### Washington State COVID Cases Data
This data portrays the monthly reported COVID infection for the year 2020 for all of Washington State divided up by counties. However for our purposes, we will be selecting the aforementioned most populous counties of Clark, King, Pierce, Snohomish, and Spokane. This data pulled off the [Washington State Department of Health](https://www.doh.wa.gov/Emergencies/COVID19/DataDashboard) is assumed to be unbiased as it is through a government surveying program as well, including a case density map as well. Furthermore, though we are focusing on the infection number data
### Washington State Population By County
This data shows the population of counties in Washington State to be used for comparison purposes when trying to figure out, for example, what percent of the county has been infected. This data was found in the [World Population Review](https://worldpopulationreview.com/us-counties/states/wa), a source, that is a dot com, but reflects the data in similar government websites, just with a cleaner csv file.
